good evening I'm
Judy Woodruff on the
NewsHour tonight
new eruptions in the
storm
following the Trump
presidency with
reports a senior
White House advisor is
a person of interest
in the Russia
investigation and
president Trump boasts
to Russian officials
that firing FBI
director Comey who
ran the probe eased
great pressure on
him then new insight
into the saga
surrounding the Russia
investigations we sit
down with a friend
of combing the color
of the wallpaper
was that these were
not honorable people
and that protecting
the FBI from them
was his days day job
also ahead millions
in Iran went to the
polls today in a high-stakes
presidential
election with global
implications and
it's Friday mark
shields and David
Brooks analyze a
whirlwind week of
news all that and more
on tonight's PBS news hour
[Music]
president Trump
faces new revelations
tonight over the
investigation of
alleged collusion
between campaign aides
and Russia the New
York Times reports
that the president told Russian
diplomats last week
that FBI director
James Comey was quote
a real nutjob and
that firing him
removed quote great
pressure on the
president over the
Russia probe separately
The Washington
Post is reporting
that a current senior
White House adviser
is now a person of
interest in the
investigation the
stories broke just
after the president
and the first lady
boarded Air Force One
and took off for
Saudi Arabia it's the
first stop on a
nine-day trip to the
Middle East in
Europe for more we're
going to turn first
to mark Mazzetti of
the New York Times
mark thank you for
being here the story
in your newspaper
that broke just a
couple of hours ago is
interesting because
it's what the
president said in
that meeting he had
with the Foreign
Minister of Russia and
the Russian ambassador
to the u.s. yeah
it's an extraordinary
moment where you
know this meeting
we already knew
happened the day after
Trump fired James
Comey as FBI director
and now we know
that and one of the
reasons he fired him
he has said is in
part because of this
Russia probe and then
he's meeting with
Russian officials and
he tells them that
he got rid of this
quote nut job which
has relieved pressure
from him so it is
sort of amazing to hear that the
president said that
to the Russians in
the Oval Office and
the fact that of
course it's the
Russians that are the
subject of this the
Trump connection to
the Russians is a subject of the
investigation
that's right and so
there's a tremendous
amount of irony
here
maybe intentional
maybe not but the it
also I think most
importantly probably
reinforces the idea
that the Russia
probe did play a
pretty significant
factor in the
president's decision to
dismiss Comey
as you know over
the last week since
Comey was fired we've
heard a number of
justifications for
the firing and the
has said once that
the Russia probe
played a part but
this is another
example of the president
saying that the
Russia FBI investigation
did play a big
role so I mean this
is what kind of gets
to the central question
here of whether
there's really something
improper in the
firing people have
raised the question
of whether it was
obstruction of justice
and him bringing up
to the Russians just
is kind of another
data point here
exactly and as you
point out there have
been different
differing explanations
over the course of
the last week or so
at one point of
course the White House
originally saying
that it had to do with
the way Jim Comey
handled the Hillary
Clinton email
investigation but then
eventually as you
say the president
referred to Russia
I also found it
striking my mark
Mazzetti what the White
House had to say
that they basically
acknowledged that
the president said
this and that they
said at one point
once again the real
story is that our
national security has
been undermined by
the leaking of
private and highly
classified conversations
so they're not
disputing this was
said no and they're
characterizing it a little bit
differently they're
saying what he was
referring to was that
he had been under
a lot of pressure by the Russia
investigation that the Russians
themselves had put
him under pressure so
he was kind of using
it as a sort of
bargaining chip to
telling these Russian
visiting officials
you guys put me under
pressure by this
thing and so now let's
meet you know kind
of let's make a deal
let's let's let's
move on to other
things so he was
using it as leverage
you know whether you
want to accept that
justification or
not that's what the
White House is saying
although as you
said they're not
disputing the contents
of what we reported
the last thing mark
Mazzetti is I think the striking
criticism the
president is making of
James Comey originally
it was a fairly
mild criticism it's
gravitated all the
way to he was a quote
real nutjob yeah
and you know we now
by now know how the
president speaks or
tweets so you know
frankly none of that the
characterization
sounded like it was off
base you could you
could certainly hear
the president making
a comment like that
Mark Mazzetti with
the New York Times we
thanks very much
okay thank you and we
turn now to our own White House
correspondent John
yang so John you've
been absorbed
this New York Times
story separately as
we said The Washington
Post has a story
about a senior advisor
to the president
currently in the
White House who is now
a quote person of
interest in this
Russia investigation
that's right Judy
the significance of
this is this is the
first time that
someone still in the
administration is
being reported to be a
person of interest
in this investigation
before we knew about
subpoenas for Mike
Flynn the fired
national security
adviser and for Paul
Manafort the former
chairman of the
campaign but this is the
first time they're
describing this as
someone close to the
president but the
post said that their
source would not
describe that person
any further give
them any more details
there are also
indications the post
saying that this
investigation is
beginning to intensify
moving to a new
phase of actually
interviewing witnesses
issuing subpoenas
using a grand jury
to investigate an
issue those subpoenas
so that this is
beginning to move
Sean Spicer responded
to the Post story
saying as he has since
this began that any
investigation will
prove that there
was no collusion
between the campaign
and any other
government and
John of course it's
striking all this
coming out just within
a couple of hours
after the president
takes off on Air Force
One for his first
overseas trip this
has been some week
for the White House
you you've been
there every day how
are they dealing
with this they
generally know it's
interesting because
the this has been a
chaotic beginning to
this administration
but the people I
talked to acknowledge
the past two weeks and this week
especially does feel different
that the the sort
of the the bombshell
revelations every day
every afternoon it
just keeps coming
now that you saw a
little bit of a
difference in the
response this week
which I thought was
interesting when
the New York Times
broke the story
about the Comey memo
about saying that the
that the president
asked for his his
loyalties personal
loyalty there really
was there was a
paper statement but
then that was it you
didn't see anybody
going out to defend
the president or
to to give their
version on television
after that there
was even someone
bought Kellyanne Conway
was booked on Fox
to do that but then
canceled
all of its interesting
John yang thank
you and we're going
to get the analysis
of mark shields and
David Brooks on all
of this and more a
little later in the
program in the day's
other news former
New York Congressman
Anthony Anthony
Weiner pleaded guilty today
to sending sexually
explicit messages to
a fifteen-year-old girl
the scandal spilled into the
presidential race
when the FBI found
some of Hillary
Clinton's emails on
weiners computer
she had sent them to
her personal aide
Huma Abedin who was
then married to Weiner
the FBI director
James Comey at the
time reopened the
Clinton email
investigation that was
days before the
election she has since
blamed her loss partly
on that decision
prosecutors in
Sweden today dropped
their long-running
rape investigation of
WikiLeaks founder
Julian Assange Paul
Davies of Independent
Television News
reports from London
where Assange is
holed up in the
Embassy of Ecuador
[Applause]
looking pale after
so many years without
sunshine Julian
Assange emerged briefly
from the embassy
that's been his home
and prison there
was a gesture that
reflected the fact that one
investigation into
him had been dropped
but rather than
celebratory his words
would be seven years
without charge why
my children grew up
without me that is
not something that
I can forgive it is
not something that I
can forget his mood
not helped by the
Metropolitan Police
saying he still
faces arrest if he
leaves his refuge the
saga began in 2010
when WikiLeaks released
vast amounts of
American secrets in
November a Swedish
international arrest
warrant was issued
following allegations
that he committed
sex offenses there
he was detained in
London and jailed but
later bailed where
he fought a series
of court cases before
eventually losing his
extradition battle
two years later
fearing deportation
to America from
Sweden
he quickly fled
to the Ecuadorian
Embassy where he's
been ever since
okay that's it thanks
guys tonight he is
still there back out
of sight while his
legal team tried
to negotiate a deal
that will allow him
to travel to the
airport and on to
Ecuador this balcony
is just six foot
above street level but
Julian Assange fears
if he steps down
here where I am he'll
be arrested very
quickly and put on
a plane to America
for now no sign of a
breakthrough in the
impasse the world's
cameras still wait
for a departure
that is not looking
imminent a UN report meantime is
shedding new light on atrocities
committed in South Sudan it says
government forces
killed 114 people in a
single village last
year others were
raped and brutalized
meanwhile the
President of Sudan
Omar al-bashir will
skip an Islamic
summit in Saudi Arabia
this weekend that
includes President
Trump Sudan is one
of six Muslim nations
included in the trump
administration's
travel ban back in
this country a New
York City man has
been charged with
murder and attempted
murder after
driving his car
into pedestrians in
Times Square one
person was killed and
22 hurt prosecutors
say Richard Rojas
deliberately drove
onto a busy sidewalk
Thursday he allegedly
told police that
he wanted to quote kill them all
investigators are
waiting for lab tests
on whether he was
using drugs President
Trump has nominated
Marine Corps General
Joseph Dunford to
stay on as chairman of
the Joint Chiefs of
Staff the Pentagon
made the official
announcement today
Dunford will continue
to serve as a top
military adviser to
the President and to
the defense secretary
Dunford was first
half with the job by
President Obama and
has served in the
post since 2015 a
federal appeals court
says that owners
of recreational drones
will not have to
register their devices
the court today
struck down a Federal Aviation
Administration rule
drone owner said it
was too burdensome
while the FAA said it
was to improve safety
the three-judge
panel said it is
ultimately up to
Congress to change
the law there is word
that Goldman Sachs
banker James Donovan
is withdrawn as the
nominee to be deputy
Treasury secretary
he told the Treasury
Department that he
wants to focus on his
family and on Wall
Street Stocks ended
this week on a high
note the Dow Jones
Industrial Average
gained nearly a
hundred and forty-two
points to close
above 20,000 8:04 the
Nasdaq rose 28 and
the S&P 500 added 16
for the week all three
indexes were down
a fraction of one
percent still to come
on the news hour an
insider's view of
how former FBI
director Comey tried to
distance himself from
the president iran
votes in a closely
watched presidential
election new orleans
removes a final
monument memorializing
its confederate
past and much more
[Music]
we take a closer
look now at James
commis final months
at the FBI through
the lens of a friend
william brangham
sat down with benjamin with us
editor-in-chief of
law fair comm to gain
some insight into the former FBI
directors dealings
with the president
during that volatile
period of time
William began by
asking with us about
the nature of his
relationship with
Comey
it's really simple
we're friends we've
been friends for a long time and
contrary to a sort
of mythology that has
developed I'm not
among his closest
friends by any means
or one of his sort
of intimate advisers
so I am in no sense
talking at his behest
I'm talking about
it because I read
the New York Times
story the other day
that the president
had asked for a
loyalty oath from him
and that story put
in frankly sharply
menacing terms a
set of comments and
anecdotes that he
had told me and I saw
them in light of that story very
differently than the
way I had seen them
before sharply menacing
yeah I think so
and so I thought
about it overnight on
Friday night and
I decided that the
public should know
about what he had
told me he really
spent an enormous
amount of energy in
the period in which
both he and Trump
were in office trying
to protect the
FBI from political
interference from
the White House
you described commies
concerns as quote
improper contacts and
interferences from
a group of people
he Comey did not
regard as honorable
what what may give
you that sense that
he didn't view these
people as honorable
people it was
written on every line
in his face it was
a evident in the
disapproving tone
that he took when he
described them
including the president
oh very much so the color of the
wallpaper was that
these were not
honorable people and
that protecting the
FBI from them was
his days day job you
write about the
famous hug when Comey
was asked to come
with a bunch of other
law enforcement
agents to the White
House
soon after the
inauguration yeah so
Comey really did not
want to go to that
meeting and there were a lot of
Democrats who kind
of blame him for
Trump so he was
particularly sensitive
to the idea of a sort of show of
intimacy or closeness
with Trump that
said he didn't feel
that he could say no
to an invitation
from the president
particularly one that
went generally to
law enforcement
senior officials he
really wanted to
kind of blend in and
not be singled out
and he's a he's six
foot eight so it's
when you're kind of
tough to do six but
eight it's really
hard to blend in
and he stands in the
part of the room
that is as far from
Trump as it is
physically possible to be
and also against
blue drapes he chose
that spot he chose
that spot because it
was you know like almost like a
chameleon and then
at the end right at
the end
Trump singles him
out in a fashion that
he regarded as sort of you know
calculated to maximally
drive home this
this sensitivity among
Democratic voters
he's become more
famous than me on he
extends his hand
kind of preemptively
and Trump grabs the
canned and kind of
pulls him into a
hug but the hug is
entirely one-sided
and Comey was just
completely disgusted
by the episode he
thought it was an
intentional attempt to
compromise him in
public in a way that
would that would so
and emphasize concerns
that half of the
electorate had about
him and the bureau
you also recount a
story of when rod
Rosenstein who is now the Deputy
Attorney General was
being nominated or
about to have his
hearings can you
explain you know
rod Rosenstein is a
respected career
prosecutor who's been
in government a long
time and served in
both the Bush and
Obama administrations
and I was rather
surprised at how
unenthusiastic Comey
was that there was
going to be a
senate-confirmed Deputy
Attorney General and what he
specifically said
was and I'll never
forget it he said
rod as a survivor
meaning he's lived
through Democratic
and Republican
administrations yeah and
you know you don't
get to survive that
long without making
some compromises and
so he said I have so
I have concerns and
I think what he was
thinking at that
moment was that if I
was asked to give a
loyalty oath and the
president has done
these things to
undermine me and to sort
of bring me into
the fold what was he
asked to do what
do you make of the
criticism that many
people have made
about Comey that if
all of these things
were happening to
you if you were asked
for a loyalty oath
if the President had
approached you about
dropping the Flint
investigation if you
felt like they were
treading uncomfortably
on your territory
why not blow the
whistle why not quit
why not raise more
hell about this if it
was so bad well so
first of all one
possibility is that
it was not so bad
that it was and I
actually think there's
some evidence of
this that this was a
situation that he
thought he was going
to have to manage
but that he could
handle that and I
think he thought he
had it under control
and look each
individual one of these
incidents is an
egregious impropriety
but they are much much worse
in light of the fact
that we know that
when he didn't get
the loyalty oath from
Comey and these efforts
to kind of bring
him into the fold
failed that he then
turned around and
fired him in the end
why do you think
Trump fired call me
Trump fired Jim Comey
because the most
dangerous thing in
the world if you're
Donald Trump is a
person who tells the
truth is dogged you
can't control and
who is as committed
as Comey is to the
institutional independence of an
organization that
has the power to
investigate you
Benjamin with us thank
you very much thanks
for having me and
you can watch Williams extended
interview with
benjamin with us online
at pbs.org slash Newshour
voters in Iran went
to the polls today
in a tightly control
but still hotly
contested presidential
election poll
closing times were
extended by several
hours as tens of
millions headed to the
63,000 polling
places throughout the
country officials
reported turnout of
around 70 percent
and vote counting has
now begun early
Saturday morning there
NPR's Morning
Edition co-host Steve
Inskeep has been
reporting all week from
Iran and I spoke with
him earlier today
I began by asking
him where he was at
that moment and to
remind us who the
main contenders are
I am in Oh Sania err
shod which is a very
famous mosque here
in Tehran it's got
special significance
in this city and
it's also tonight a
polling place that
people behind me are
in line waiting to
vote and if you were
to follow this line
it would go out the
door down the steps
around the corner
all the way down the
block and off into
the darkness and as
I've been driving
around the city
tonight Judy I've seen
lines like this
all over the city
mosques are polling
places buses are
polling places there's a lot of
enthusiasm at this
moment for one or
both of the two
main candidates for
president Hassan
rouhani the incumbent
Annie bream raised
and you wrote today
Steve for NPR that
this election has in
a way come down to
a referendum on the
incumbent mr. ruhani
what did you mean
by that
well it's true in
America too isn't it
when a president
runs for reelection
it's really about
the president and
whether people are
satisfied with the
job that he's done
and that's especially
true in this case
because Hassan rouhani
has been such a
different figure he's
not a radical he's
not an outsider he's
been a member of Iran's clerical
establishment for
decades but he ran
in 2013 on a promise
to begin to open Iran
up to the world to
improve relations
with other countries
and also to bring
freedom at home he's
been through four
dramatic years in
which he made a
nuclear deal that
included the United
States along with
other world powers
a profound change in
relations at least
on that one issue
with the United States
and there's been
some small signs of
opening here in Iran
as well although
there are people who
are frustrated
that Moore has not
happened as well as
people frustrated
about the state of
the economy but he's
also faced what I'm
reading is a pretty
stiff challenge from
the conservative
cleric who's running against him
they're both clearance
they're both from
the same world they
both the different
times have been
close to the guy who
holds the most
power in Iran Iran's
supreme leader
Ayatollah Ali Khamenei
who's not up for
reelection by the way
he is not elected by
the people but the
president is rouhani
the someone was
close to the supreme
leader and then
positioned himself
as a more moderate
figure who could try
to change the rut
that Iran had
gotten itself in the
isolation that Iran
had gotten itself in
and that's how he
won election and now
every humor IEC is
a figure who has
positioned himself
is very close to the
Supreme Leader and
he's seen as far more
conservative although
I should add he's
also been very populist
in the way that
he's campaigned
hammering president
rouhani for the
state of the economy
making promises to
improve things for
people here by taking
steps such as
increasing the cash
payments the small
cash payments that
are given to each
irani and how much our
attitudes toward the
United States the
US and the nuclear
deal part of this
election it is a
part of the election
but only a part
voters who support
rouhani when I've
interviewed them over
the last several
days in different
cities here in Iran
one of the things
they say again and
again that they want
is better relations
with the world and
the nuclear deal
is part of them the
nuclear deal is
also part of this
campaign in a negative
way for president
rouhani because he
made what were seen
as extravagant
promises that if Iran
would only make the
nuclear deal happen
economic sanctions
would be lifted and
Iran's economy which
has been struggling
would improve
economists are impressed
with a lot of the
things that he's done
but the unemployment
rate remains very
very high the economy
has not created
jobs rapidly enough
for a very large
very young very
rapidly growing and
pretty well-educated
population and
finally Steve you
mentioned the Supreme
Leader a moment ago
how much does this
election really matter
in the theocracy
that Iran is you
know it matters it
doesn't matter totally rouhani's
election in 2013
brought some change
brought a nuclear deal
brought more openness
and I felt it in
multiple visits to
Iran over the last
four years it's a
little more open each
time people people
are a little more
fearless each time
even though it's also
true that many people have to be
extremely careful
about what they say or
what they write there
is more openness
there is a tiny bit
more freedom than
there used to be and
rouhani election in
2013 can be seen as
the reason for that
so you could argue
that this election
too might bring
change to this country
which has been through
a pretty dramatic
story over the last
several decades
NPR Steve Inskeep
at a busy polling
place in Tehran
thank you thank you
[Music]
stay with us coming
up on the news hour
mark shields and
David Brooks analyze a
week of constant
breaking news and an
author pays tribute
to his parents lives
but first how we
continue to wrestle
with American history
New Orleans is just
the latest city to
start taking down historical but
controversial
monuments that many say
celebrates slavery
and the Confederacy
william brangham is
back with that in
downtown New Orleans
today workers began
removing the
historic robert e lee
statue from his
nearly seventy foot
pedestal New Orleans Mayor Mitch
Landrieu and in the
second decade of the
21st century asking
African Americans or
anyone else for that
matter to drive by
property that they
owned occupied by
reverential statutes
of men who fought
to destroy the
country and deny that
person's humanity
seems perverse the
city dismantled this
statue in the broad
light of day but
three others were
recently taken down
under cover of night
with no advance
notice because of
threats of violence
city contractors
wore masks and
bulletproof vests and
were guarded by
police snipers it's
cheap it's low it's
how it the cowardly
as ever was cowardice
this is an act of
cowardice and treachery
right here this
is American history
whether you like it
or not this all goes
back to a December
2015 City Council
vote to take down
these monuments
following an op-ed by
city native and
jazz musician Wynton
Marsalis urging
the removal of the
monuments many have
argued it was an
appropriate response
to the killing of
nine black church
parishioners that year
in Charleston South
Carolina by avowed
white supremacists
Dylan roof weeks
after that attack
South Carolina removed
the Confederate
battle flag from its
State Capitol back
to today New Orleans
plans to store the
statues until it
finds an appropriate
location for them
but their removal
has angered opponents
who see this as
suppressing or rewriting
history in the
service of political
correctness many
years later when
historians or
politicians declare a war
unjust
immoral does that
negate the ultimate
price these soldiers
and families paid
soldiers do not
make policy elected
leaders do a lot of
this our people are
against or either not from here
originally and don't
understand that you
know our culture
and a lot of people
even from here don't
know their history
last week in Baton
Rouge the Louisiana
State House passed
HB 71 which would
require a referendum
before any military
monument could be
renamed or removed in
a show of defiance
black caucus members
walked out after the
vote meanwhile last
weekend in
Charlottesville Virginia
torched barring
protesters including
white nationalists
Richard Spencer
marched against the
removal of a robert
e lee statue there
the Southern Poverty
Law Center counts more than 700
Confederate monuments
and statues on
public lands across
the country the vast
majority of those are
in the south so is
this the right approach
for dealing with
the darker sides
of US history I'm
joined now by two
men who have wrestled
with this very question
Bryan Stevenson
is founder and executive
director of the
equal justice initiative
he's helping build
a national monument
to the victims of
lynching in Montgomery
Alabama and Walter Isaacson is a
historian and writer
and president of
the Aspen Institute
welcome to you both
Walter I'd like to
start with you first
you are a native of
New Orleans you were
there when they are
bringing Robert Ely
down off his pedestal
today what do you
make of the city's
moves I think it's
very very good as you say these
Confederate monument
statues were put up
not to honor the
nobility of any of
these people it was
put up in the 1880s
1890's as a way to
try to reassert white
supremacy New Orleans
has had a 300-year
history we've just
gone through a
hurricane if you're
going to name the
people we should
have monuments - it's
not Confederate
generals so I think
there's a big sigh
of relief today as
the last of these
comes down Bryan
Stevenson what is
your reaction to this
how does this sit
with you well I think
it's also very long
overdue and a really
important step for
one of America's
great cities that wants to be Oh
been and inviting
to all the people of
the world and I
think this legacy of
racial inequality
and segregation has
really put a cloud
over New Orleans and
these statutes
and monuments have
reflected that cloud
more powerfully
than anything these
totems are made of
concrete and steel
and bronze but they
have been screaming
at African Americans
for decades and
what they've been
screaming is this
narrative of racial
difference this history of white
supremacy so I
think this is long
overdue and part of
that has to do with
the legacy and I
don't think the great
evil of American
slavery was involuntary
servitude and forced
labor I think the
real evil of American
slavery was this
narrative of racial
difference we
created the ideology
of white supremacy
that we made up we
said black people are
different than white
people they're not
fully human our
courts held that black
people were only
three-fifths human and
our 13th amendment dealt with
involuntary servitude
in forced labor
but it didn't deal
with this ideology of
white supremacy and
because of that I
don't think slavery
ended in 1865 I
think it just evolved
and the proof of
that was the erection of these
narratives are
these monuments and
totems which came
after a violent
resistance as Walter
said to racial
equality and they've
been there for
decades screaming
that that narrative of
racial difference
that resistance to the
end of emancipation
to integration is
something worth
honoring and I think
that has to change
if we're going to be
a country that makes
progress in dealing
with racial inequality
I would agree
that it was good to
have the discussion
to Brian
which helped this
city I mean when I was
first has to be on
the try Centennial
Commission down here
wynton marsalis said
I'll do it with you
if we take down robert
e lee and i said
well i never paid
much attention to
robert e lee when
you go around lee
circle and went and
said i did we did
and that helped us
do a dialogue down
here which now is
pretty complete but
walter you heard
you heard brian say
that they were
screaming that these
statues were screaming
about inequality
and and white superiority
there's also a
great deal of screaming
that people who
are furious that
these monuments are
coming down I mean
how is a mayor or a
governor and
we're in the country
supposed to wrestle
with that very real
boiling anger over
these exact moves
well I think what
happened here in New
Orleans is we spent
a lot of time talking
about it and the
anger especially
among local citizens
receded I think
there's a willingness
now to put this behind
as I said I just
came from Lee Circle
there's a brass
band they're playing
the national anthem
I think that once we
had this catharsis
of talking about it
there were people
who protested the
monuments coming down
but they were all
outsiders who had come
in from these weird
groups around the
country in New Orleans
right now it was
a day time very
peaceful thing to get
this Monument down
and I think the whole
process of talking
it through and
realizing that we don't
need to put the Confederacy on a
pedestal in New
Orleans which was it
even you know part
of the Civil War
really Brian one of
the other criticism
that's been brought
up is the potential
for a slippery slope
here which is where
do we stop I mean
I'm talking to you
from Washington DC we have the
Washington Monument
we have Jefferson's
Memorial we have
monuments all over
the country that
honor people who
held slaves how do we
where do we draw
the line as to what
stays and what goes
well I think it's
important to have a
conversation about
what we honor and
why but I think
there's a huge
difference between robert
e lee and jefferson
davis and people who
were the architects
and defenders of
slavery people who were actually
considered traitors
and treasonous many
of whom thought
should be hanged after
the Civil War and
I think it's just a
radical difference
between what we see
in the American South
and we have states
like my state of Alabama where
Confederate Memorial
Day is a state
holiday where Jefferson
Davis's birthday
is a state holiday
that's very far away
from the conversations
that we're having
in other parts of
the country and I
think it does
matter we talk about
memorials a lot we
have a 9/11 memorial
in this country because
what happened on
9/11 was significant
to the nation to
its history to
its culture and we
believed in the
power of memorials to
say something about
who we are that
doesn't mean
that if a nation
put up a statute
honouring Osama bin
Laden we would think
that that's
acceptable we would be
absolutely provoked
by that and so there
is a way to think
about what we honor
that reflects who
we are what we think
is significant the
greatest person of
the most influential
person of the 20th
century was arguably
Adolf Hitler that
doesn't mean that
there should be
statutes of him in
Germany we'd be very
provoked by that
and so I do think we
have to ask hard
questions and I think
on the question of
the Confederacy and
the architects and
defenders of white
supremacy symbols
of resistance to
integration there
should be no debate we
cannot move forward
if we actually think
there's something
acceptable about
honoring that legacy
Walter what do you
make of that is there is there a
slippery slope is
there a line that's
clear to you as well
as to what stays
and what goes you
know William all
slopes are slippery
that's why you try
to find a moral
footing Brian got it
right you say what
was the purpose of
this memorial we have
a memorial in this
city right behind me
look over my shoulder
to Andrew Jackson
that's because and
it was put up at 1840
in the square where
Jackson statue is
that's where he
mustered the troops to
win the Battle of
New Orleans so that
memorial is there to
honor that he was a
bad slave owner he
had a lot wrong with
him but you have to
say is this a sig is
this a symbol of
white supremacy and
Confederacy and
traitorous or is it
because he won the
Battle of New Orleans
people say things are
slippery slopes of
course they're
slippery slopes that's
why you have moral
arguments to say
where do I put my
footing where do I try
to draw the line
all right Walter
Isaacson Bryan
Stevenson thank you both
very much thank you thanks
[Music]
now back to the swirl of news
surrounding the
White House the FBI's
Russia probe and more
with the analysis
of shields and Brooks
that syndicated
columnist mark
shields and New York
Times columnist
David Brooks welcome
gentlemen so much
to talk about what a
week I don't even
know where to begin I
will mention that
cNN has just been
reporting in the
last few minutes that
they have from
several sources that
White House lawyers
are beginning to at
least research the mechanism of
impeachment they
don't have reason to
believe the story
says that anything
like that's going
to happen soon but
they are looking into
it but David this
week there again
there's so much to talk
about but let's talk about the
appointment of a
special counsel robert
muller the former
FBI director in the
midst of this all
this speculation about
the Russia connection
what does this do
to the cloud hanging
over the White
House well it's
interesting that after a
year spent campaigning
against the
insiders the swamp the beltway
establishment that
when you get a big
crisis everyone wants
somebody with some
experience and some
credibility and so
this appointment
has been greeted I
think by Republicans
in Congress by
Republic by Democrats
by most of the
country as a sign of
okay finally we're
gonna get some
straight answers and it
strikes me is
absolutely necessary I
mean today's story
from from nine
newspaper that he
told the Russians that
he got really call me to relieve
pressure you know
we used to have a
better class of
criminal where if you
obstructed justice
you tried to hide it
and he's going
around bragging on
national TV and
then bragging to our
adversaries that
he's obstructing
justice
so whether or not
he's obstructed
justice he certainly
seems to be acting
like he did and that
certainly justifies
a special counsel
what do you make of a
special counsel
pick I think it's a
lifesaver for
Republicans I really do I
think and it's a cold water for
congressional inquiries
we went through
the Rand Carter
hearings and Ollie North
who was one of the
central figures was
convicted of three
felonies and in fact
that was overturned
because of immunity
had been given to
witnesses and that
that testimony had
compromised the
his own defense well
you know its own
defense so ever since
then there's been
an apprehension early
rhiness about in
any way affecting or
shaping a criminal
investigation national security
investigation is the
kind of Robert MOA
very respected former
FBI director 13
years is about to
launch so I think
they'll be we won't
see Paul Manafort we
won't see Roger
stone we won't see
Carter page in public
I doubt very much
I think the hearings
will go forward but
not on the Senate
and the Senate in the
Senate in the house
but not not with the
same the same kind of intensity
perhaps just just
passion that we've had
and for Republicans
it takes it off the
front page and it
it guarantees that
it's going to be an
investigation but
there's no timetable
and and let's be
very frank I mean
Bob mullah is a
consensus all-american
choice here he
really is I think
it's hard to criticize
him I disagree with
one thing I'd okay
it's going to off
the front page I mean
well not if we
continue to have the
president telling the
Russians something
that 16 hours earlier
his people had
told the American
people they did it
because of Hillary
Clinton's emails and
call me and they only
fired the commies
firing and that
16 hours later he
privately tells
the Russians when
there's no American
press around I think
what a couple things
happened this week
one is the special
counsel you know a
couple of the Russian
thing there's an
investigation of
person interest but to
me the most interesting
thing is that
the White House staff
and the the people
under Donald Trump
at least some portion
of them or some
large portion of them
seem to have turned
against Donald Trump
I have not talked
to our reporters who
broke this story
but if I read it
correctly some
senior administration
official with top
secret clearance read
the readout to a reporter that's
breaking the law and
that's doing it in
a way because you
think you need to be
deep throat you need
to undermine this
guy you need to tell
get the truth out
about this guy and in the Nixon
administration there
were a couple deep
throats there was a
guy off in the FBI
who was willing to
leave but in this
administration they
seem to be in every
closet and behind every
I'm exaggerating a
little but there are
squads of deep throats
and so that means
this story is not only a legal
investigation
it's a dis dissolution of an
administration and
and mark talking
about not only
talking about what the
President had to
say about Comey but
also sharing the fact
that the president
shared intelligence
with the Russian
intelligence where
there is a remarkable
story in and of itself
I could not agree
with you more Judy
I mean and the what
looked like a generous
offer by Vladimir
Putin that I'll make
it available to you
the minutes of the
meeting you know
turns out really to
be a veiled threat
because I mean the
revelation of the
minutes of that
meeting are devastating
they devastate
the administration
picking up on what
David said I don't
think there's any
question that this is
a body blow to this
administration I
won't say it's dead
men walking but it's
you cannot pass a
legislative program on
Capitol Hill
especially when it's
controversial where
the president who
has absolutely no
attention span no
clout no credibility
and his is diminished
to the point where
it is just nothing
believable that's
coming out of this
way substantively
that's sort of what's
happened we've had
administration's
that have had big
scandals before but the Nixon
administration by
the time the scandal
hit they had a very
qualified White
House staff and all
these agencies named
with Clinton same
with Reagan with this
administration they've
imploded before
they've had time to staff up and
therefore they do not
have people in the
in the jobs to do
the normal work of
administration and
at this point who's
going to want to go
into those jobs no
one is going to want
to go to those jobs
so whatever happens with the
investigation were looking at an
administration
that will be poorly
staffed or unstaffed
trying to run the
country and and Mark
you mentioned how
do you get anything
done although I will
say I heard Paul
Ryan talk give a talk
last night and he
said this is all what
he called white
noise he said we're
going to focus on
the business of the
country we're going
to work on getting
health care done then
we're going to do
tax reform later
than the tax reform
bill is okay and
it's why I guess it's
with the infrastructure
bill and we're
approaching Memorial
Day Judy and if
there isn't a health
care bill by the
fourth of July out of the Senate
that that's on
life-support if it
perhaps even beyond
so then then you're
a Republican and
you're running and even
the Paul Ryan and
it's a lovely man but
you're running in
2018 and now it's
going to be nothing
but a referendum on
Donald Trump you
won't even have a
legislative program
to be able go back
and talk about I mean
you know it's it I
cannot overstate how
unbelievable would
Willie this administration
has become I
mean you know it
was said that George
Washington was the
president could never
tell a lie and
Richard Nixon was the
president could
never tell the truth
Donald Trump is truly
the president who
can't tell the
difference I mean he
changes his story as
he did last week on
the Russian meeting
and on the firing of
Jim Comey depending
upon whom he's
talking to whether
it's NBC or whether
it's his own staff
and picking up on
David's point about
the staff Judy the
morale is just
absolutely at low ebb
you're now facing legal fees
I remember Maggie
Williams who was
Hillary Clinton's
chief of staff facing
over $300,000 in legal fees
everybody's lawyer
up just sitting at a
meeting now is David
talking to somebody
else I mean it's
just distrust it's an
awful situation
well to add a little
fuel to the fire
I'm being told right
now by our executive
producer Sarah just
that there's a report
that the Senate
Intelligence Committee
chair and vice
chair Richard Burr
of North Carolina
Mark Warner of
Virginia are announcing
that Jim Comey the
fired FBI director
has agreed to testify
an open session I
think I'm hearing
that correctly I don't
I don't have who
it's coming from I
gather it's coming
from the Senate so
that will be
that'll be something
everybody Beulah
that'll be me we just
served been with
us earlier in the
program with his
interpretation would
call me thinks hear
directly from Comey
would be a cinematic
Cecil B DeMille
moment I don't
witness comments about
how he he about how
Comey felt about the
president pulling
him over yes pulling
him into a hug yeah
and the contemporaneous
memos that he
obviously kept from
those experiences
interactions with
the president and
remember this Judy
Jim Comey as FBI
director there are
subject areas he
couldn't discuss before
the intelligence
kameena now Donald
Trump has opened
up Donald Trump has
made it possible he's
no longer the FBI
director and he's
all he's doing is
responding to charges
I'm substantiate
according to Jim
call me that Donald
Trump has made about
so this this is a
if in fact the
Senate Intelligence
Committee hearings
are open and Jim
Comey is there it
will be a rating
Bonanza coincidence
that Donald Trump we
learned called him
enough job a few
hours ago and now
this comes up is it
but but but David
this is just as as we
said the president
has just taken off on
this big nine day
first overseas trip
he's going to the
Middle East he's
meeting with the
leaders of so many
European countries
does life go on in
some way respects
in this country in
this city while all
this is happening in
my contacts with
the Trump people
compartmentalization
is high and guys
are good at it I
don't know maybe but
but but they they
would like to pretend
this is not happening
but at the as Mark
said they can't in
their heart of hearts
be sanguine about it
because there a lot
of them are leaking
a lot of them don't
know who's going
to write the memoir
against each another
a lot of them are
going to be under
investigation some of
them you know
there's a target of
interest in the
White House and right
now according to the
Washington Post in
the Russia inquiry
and so they can't
ignore all that but
they're trying to
pretend that all is
normal and I think
that is the pretense
that they're trying
to pull off mark
you've been in the city
for a lot well almost
as long as I know
Julian so but I
heard Henry Hamilton
yeah how does this
city deal with a
situation and how
does the country deal
with a situation
like this well I mean
we've never had one
like this that there
is the first of all
there's no reservoir
of shared experiences with this
president we have
shared values so
you've been through there's no
accomplishment you
can point to and say
well I'm going to
give them the benefit
of the doubt so
that's missing but as
far as the the White
House staff and I
have great sympathy
for people work in
the White House
they work long hours
they they miss
birthday parties they
miss children's
recitals and what you
get what you get
really is a sense that
I'm involved in
something larger there's
a sense of psychic income and
you've got a boss
who has absolutely no
loyalty I mean who's
disparaging his
staff who's abusing
his staff according
to reports in major
papers so this this
is just that this
again saps all morale
and and leads to I
don't care if I go to
the meeting in fact
I'd rather not be in
the meeting instead
of please let me in
the meeting so I
I don't see how it
continues
I really don't
everybody who has been
associated with
this man has been
diminished has had
his own reputation
whether it's
Rosenstein a gentleman
master whoever it is
they are a smaller
person for their association
identification with
Donald Trump but
just quickly David
we started this
conversation talking
about how the
appointment of Bob
Muller robert muller
is the special counsel
has somewhat calm
the waters yeah but
i don't think too
much i did i think
this is now there's a
reality TV show and
the people everybody
in this town he just
walked in iran and
write the book gonna
want to leak the
memo but i want to get their own
self-preservation
out there and so the
reality TV show what
involves a public
unwinding not a
private investigation
David Brooks mark
shields thank you both
thank you Judy
[Music]
finally an essay by
author Richard Ford
his latest book between
them is a memoir
of his parents
lives and tonight he
shares his humble
opinion about taking
note of their love
have ilysm goodness
knows there are lots
of reasons to write
a memoir to render
testimony to bear
witness to make sense
of a recollected
life that had
failed to make sense
before to turn to
the mysteries of
memory and provides
the continuous
narrative of our
own life and in that
way substantiate
ourselves to ourselves
and others said
Augustine told us memory
is a Faculty of
the soul writing a
memoir about my
parents Parker and Edna
Ford didn't seem to
be so much writing
about myself as
about them although I
was their only child
and the only one
remaining to say that
they even existed
so here is another
reason to write a
memoir to utter what
must not be erased
I wrote about my
parents because decades
after their deaths
and when I was no
longer young I
realized that I plainly
missed them and
wished in some way to
draw them near me
again writing about
them would do that I
thought it is worth
saying such an emotion
missing them is
possible and can be
acted upon even long
after it might be
supposed that enough
time has passed for
longing to subside
my parents were
wonderful parents though
other than causing
me to happen and
making each other
blissful for 32 years
they set little in
motion and whereas
most of our parents are all but
unnoticeable in the world's
disinterested eye
and yet it's fair to
say that because
they were who and how
they were being
their son seemed a
privilege and almost
mysteriously they
opened for me a world of immense
possibility the choice
to make fictional
characters of my
parents which would
seem to be what many
novelists do simply
didn't occur to me
fictions reliance on
artifice its
necessity to suspend
disbelief in order
to assure trust its
engrossing arbitrariness and its
foundation and the
provisional all these
orchestrations of
fiction threatened to
overpower my
parents what I wanted
as their son was
not for disbelief
to be suspended but
for it to be abolished
and for belief in
my parents in their
lives to become
absolute facts with
their blunder more
specific hold on
truth seemed to me the
better way to
represent my parents as
they were in a better
way for me to say
that because of how
they were not in
spite of it
they merited the
world's attention
that's worth saying
- age is a winnowing
process and sometimes
what gets sifted
out as we seek to
know the important
consequence of
lives are the actual
lives themselves
odd to think that we
could even for a
moment overlook such
rudiments or take
them for granted
memoirs for that -
it's great virtue
being to remind
us that in a world
cloaked in supposition
and opinion and
misdirection and
often an outright
untruth things do
actually happen my
parents lives did
take place and it is
here in the
incontrovertible truth that
facts provide but
our firmest beliefs
must first take hold
[Music]
on the NewsHour
online right now the
influential cult
favorite TV show Twin
Peaks is returning
after almost three
decades off the air
we visit the real
towns that helped
to give the show its
iconic creepiness
all that and more is
on our web site pbs.org/newshour
and Robert Costa
is preparing for
Washington Week this
evening Robert what
do you have in store
well Judy we'll
have the latest on
a developing story
that one day after
firing FBI director
Comey President Trump
spoke with Russian
diplomats about
his decision plus
reports that a
current White House
official has emerged
as a significant
person of interest
in the federal probe
will make sense of
quite a week for the
Trump administration
later tonight on
Washington week Judy
it has been quite a
week and we'll be
watching you and that
is the NewsHour for
tonight I'm Judy
Woodruff have a great
weekend thank you
and we'll see you soon
[Music]
you're watching PBS
you